                                                      WPS6508


Policy Research Working Paper                        6508




   The Impact of Consulting Services on Small
           and Medium Enterprises
           Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Mexico

                                  Miriam Bruhn
                                   Dean Karlan
                                 Antoinette Schoar




The World Bank
Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
June 2013
Policy Research Working Paper 6508


  Abstract
  Using a randomized evaluation with 432 Mexican small                               security data, the analysis finds a large increase in
  and medium enterprises, this paper shows that access to                            the number of employees and total wage bill several
  management consulting led to better firm performance:                              years after the program. The paper documents large
  one-year results show positive effects on return-on-assets                         heterogeneity in the specific managerial practices that
  and total factor productivity. Owners also had large                               improved as a result of the consulting, but there is no
  increases in “entrepreneurial spirit ? (an entrepreneurs’                           singular mechanism as a panacea for all firms.
  managerial confidence index). Using Mexican social




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at mbruhn@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
      The Impact of Consulting Services on Small and Medium Enterprises: Evidence from a
                                 Randomized Trial in Mexico 1

                                                             Miriam Bruhn
                                                             Dean Karlan
                                                           Antoinette Schoar




Keywords: enterprise growth; entrepreneurship; managerial capital
JEL: D21, D24, L20, M13, O12




1
  Miriam Bruhn: The World Bank (mbruhn@worldbank.org), Dean Karlan: Yale University; Innovations for Poverty Action; Jameel Poverty Action
Lab; NBER (dean.karlan@yale.edu), Antoinette Schoar: MIT Sloan; NBER; Ideas42 (aschoar@mit.edu). We are grateful to the management and
staff of IPPC and would like to thank the field research management team at Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA), including Alissa Fishbane,
Javier Gutiérrez, Ashley Pierson, Douglas Randall and Anna York, and Ximena Cadena at ideas42, for excellent research assistance. We also
thank Judith Frías at IMSS for her support in analyzing the employment impacts of the project. Financial support for this project was provided
by the Government of the State of Puebla, via the Consejo para el Desarrollo Industrial, Comercial y de Servicios, the Knowledge for Change
trust fund of the World Bank, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation via the Financial Access Initiative for funding. All opinions and errors in
this paper are those of the authors and not of any of the donors or of the World Bank.
1. Introduction
        A large literature in development economics and entrepreneurship aims to understand the
impediments to firm growth, especially for small and medium sized enterprises. Most of the focus thus
far has been on financial constraints as a central obstacle to firm growth. For example, empirical studies
have examined these constraints at the micro level (Banerjee et al. 2009; de Mel et al. 2008; Karlan and
Zinman 2011; Karlan et al. 2012) as well as at the macro level (King and Levine 1993; Rajan and Zingales
1998). However, capital alone cannot generate firm growth; one must also have the “managerial
capital ? to know how to use it. We argue that managerial capital can directly affect the firm by
improving strategic and operational decisions, but it also affects the productivity of other factors, such
as physical capital and labor, by helping to use them more efficiently. Bruhn et al. (2010) discusses at
more length the role of “managerial capital ? as a key component for enterprise development, distinct
from human capital. The diffuse effect of managerial capital often makes it difficult to measure its
impact empirically.
        Recent work has shown enormous heterogeneity in management practices and CEO styles
across firms, see for example Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Bloom and Van Reenen (2007 and 2010), and
Bennedsen et al. (2007). But a central question remains: is this observed heterogeneity a reflection of an
optimal match between the underlying fundamentals of different firms and the type of management
that is needed given the firm’s state of development? Or is lack of managerial capital a first order
impediment to firm growth and profitability? Managers in developing countries might be constrained in
the acquisition of these skills, if such skills require either formal training or experience in other well-run
enterprises, or both, see for example Gompers et al. (2005) or Caselli and Gennaioli (2005).
        We test if alleviating the constraints on managerial capital has a first order effect on the
performance and growth of small enterprises in emerging markets. We focus on micro, small, and
medium enterprises since they are often seen as being the most affected by limitations in managerial
capital and thus have the most potential for scale up if bottlenecks to their growth can be removed. In
addition, for small businesses run by the owner-manager, it is simple to determine the appropriate
target for a managerial capital intervention. Our intervention aims to expand the managerial skills of the
owner-managers by giving them access to subsidized consulting and mentoring services. These services
were provided by nine local consulting firms, which focus on SMEs, over a one-year period. We worked
with the government of Puebla, an industrialized state close to Mexico City, to set up the experiment.
        It is important to note that this intervention, like all skill building experiments which have been
conducted thus far, is a joint test of two closely related hypotheses: On the one hand we aim to

                                                      2
establish if managerial capital is a limiting factor in the growth of enterprises. But at the same time, we
can only find a positive answer if this knowledge can be conveyed via a consulting intervention in the
first place. It could be that managerial capital is indeed a hindrance to growth, but it might not be
possible to transfer this knowledge by simply providing consulting services. Therefore, failure to find a
result here would not prove that managerial capital does not matter, but may simply mean that this
program was not effective in the transmission of managerial skills (or that managerial skills are innate
skills and simply not teachable). However, this exercise provides a lower bound on the potential impact
of improvements in managerial capital, given the limitation of the efficacy of this particular intervention
to actually improve managerial capital. We set up a randomized control trial in Puebla, Mexico, where
432 micro, small, and medium sized enterprises applied to receive subsidized consulting services, and
150 out of the 432 were randomly chosen to receive the treatment. The remaining 282 enterprises
served as a control group that did not receive any subsidized consulting services. Treatment enterprises
were matched with one of nine local consulting firms based on the specialized services they needed.
Enterprises met with their consultants for four hours per week over a one year period. The enterprise
owner and consulting firm decided jointly on the focus and scope of the consulting services based on a
first daylong diagnostic consultation between the enterprise and the consulting firm.
        We measure impacts on the firms and the owners/managers in two different ways: (1) we
administer a self-reported baseline and a one-year follow-up survey, and (2) we obtain confidential
government data on employment levels and total wages for the firms in our treatment and control
groups using five years of annual data (two years prior to three years after the intervention) from the
Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS). We find that the consulting intervention had a positive short-
run impact on the productivity of the enterprises in the treatment group in the one-year follow-up.
Productivity and return on assets (ROA) both increased by one fifth of a standard deviation, compared
to the control group. But we do not find an impact on sales, profits, or the number of workers employed
within the first year. This is consistent with the idea that the impact of improved managerial skills is
heterogeneous with respect to concrete channels through which the firms improved: for some, the
impact may have been to increase revenues, for others to lower costs, for others to shed unproductive
assets. No single channel dominated the sample to be statistically significant, but the comprehensive
measures of productivity and ROA show positive short-run impacts within the first year.
        In the longer run, the administrative data, collected from the Mexican Social Security Institute
(IMSS), reveals important impacts on employment, with a 44% higher number of employees, and a 57%
higher total wage bill. The point estimates of the positive treatment effects are quite large but we

                                                    3
believe that they are reasonable given the context of the intervention and the confidence interval: The
enterprises in our sample were started by people who are not professional managers and many of them
had not received any formal management training at all prior to our intervention; the majority of the
firms were relatively small, so adding a single worker would have been a significant increase in
employment. Furthermore, the confidence interval is quite large, although strictly above zero, i.e., the
null result of zero is rejected.
        When looking at the specific managerial improvements by which these changes were brought
about, we find a variety of dimensions that are mentioned in the surveys but no one strong pattern. Out
of 11 management practices that we asked about in the surveys, we find only two that are consistently
mentioned and show statistically significant process changes after the intervention: (1) the likelihood to
engage in marketing efforts, and (2) the likelihood to keep formal accounts about their firms. However,
we show that as a whole these changes were important enough that they led to a significant
improvement in the entrepreneurial spirit for the owners overall: We construct what we call an
“entrepreneurial spirit ? index from a number of questions we asked owners/managers about their
confidence in their management skills and their ability to grow their firm and handle difficulties. These
questions were inspired by the “nexus of control ? literature in psychology.
        We argue that it is not a great surprise that the intervention did not unearth one specific
management dimension that all firms needed to improve given the complexity of managerial decisions.
Instead, each firm seemed to be facing a number of different gaps in their managerial capital; the
consultants were able to creatively problem solve with the entrepreneurs and find a way to supplement
the knowledge they needed. To help us put more texture around the specific types of problems that
were commonly addressed in the consultations, we turn to some qualitative evidence: We provide eight
detailed narratives of the consulting advice provided to firms, and the perceptions by the owners and
consultants of the impact of the advice on the businesses. These narratives tell a consistent story of
complexity: SMEs needed support with a myriad of different problems. Overall, our results confirm that
lack of managerial capital is a first order constraint for small and mid-sized enterprises. However, there
is no one silver bullet, i.e., no one single mechanism, that when taught then unleashes growth for the
enterprises.
        Research and practice have recently seen a flurry of programs focused on developing
managerial capital for microenterprises (i.e., enterprises typically with zero employees, or under five at
the most). The interventions vary widely in the scope of the management skills that are transmitted and
the type of enterprises that are targeted. The training is typically provided as in-class training, often

                                                    4
linked with a microcredit program. For example, Karlan and Valdivia (2011) and Cole and Zia (2011)
evaluate what is best described as in-class programs. These papers show that traditional
microenterprise training seems to affect the command of accounting practices for microenterprises, but
has limited to no effects on actual firm outcomes and performance. More recently, Bruhn and Zia (2011)
and Giné and Mansuri (2011) also find that in-class training for micro entrepreneurs leads to
improvements in business practices but has only limited effects on business performance and sales.
Drexler, Fischer, and Schoar (2011) show that training programs for SMEs increase in impact if they are
targeted to the owner’s level of sophistication: A simple Rule-of-Thumb training has significant impact
on real outcomes for micro entrepreneurs who have low educational attainment and poor business
practices prior to the intervention, but not on more advanced businesses.
        Bloom et al. (2011) is more closely rated to our study in that they evaluate the impact of
intensive consulting services from an international management consulting firm on the business
practices of large Indian textile firms. The average firm in their sample has about 270 employees,
whereas the average number of employees in our study is 14. Bloom et al. find that even these larger
firms were unaware of many modern management practices, and treated plants improved their
management practices during the intervention. The approaches of Bloom et al. and this study are
complementary in nature: Bloom et al. (2011) focuses on a small set of large firms in one industry,
textile manufacturing, with a tightly defined intervention by a major international consulting firm. Such
focus provides clear estimates, including mechanisms in terms of business practice changes, of a specific
management intervention, but it does not allow the authors to test if lack of managerial capital is a
widespread problem. Our current study includes a larger set of firms and industries (close to 400 firms
compared to 20 experimental plants in Bloom et al.), and employs a heterogeneous set of local
consulting firms. Therefore, we are able to establish that managerial capital constraints are important
for a wider set of small businesses and affect business practices on many dimensions. We can provide
proof of concept that general increases in managerial capital for small businesses significantly affect firm
performance and growth. But the tradeoff is that we cannot estimate the returns to one specific
management intervention, or specific changes in particular business practices.
        The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we describe the subsidized
consulting program. Section 3 discusses the experimental setup, data collection, and characteristics of
our sample. Section 4 gives the results, examining both business outcomes and business process
variables. Section 5 asks why more enterprises do not use consulting services, i.e., given these results,
what are the possible market failures in the consulting services industry? Section 6 concludes.

                                                     5
2. Consulting Program
          The randomized control trial was conducted with the Puebla Institute for Competitive
Productivity (known as IPPC, after its Spanish acronym), a training institute set up by the Ministry of
Labor of the Mexican State of Puebla. IPPC implemented a business development program to provide
participating enterprises with subsidized consulting services from one of a number of local consulting
firms. The program, which started in March 2008 and ended in February 2009, aimed to include 100
micro, 40 small, and 10 medium-sized enterprises 2 and actually included 108 micro enterprises, 34 small
enterprises and 8 medium-sized enterprises. The primary goal was to help enterprises reach the next
size category by the end of the program and thus contribute to job creation and economic growth of the
region.
          Consultants were asked to (1) diagnose the problems that prevented the enterprises from
growing, (2) suggest solutions that would help to solve these problems and (3) assist enterprises in
implementing the solutions. The consultants dedicated four hours per week to each enterprise. The
program was originally intended to last two years but ended prematurely after one year due to
government funding issues (no results from the study had been released when the funding decision was
made; the decision was not related to perceived performance of the program). Thus the implementation
phase was shortened.
          The consulting services were highly subsidized by the State of Puebla. Micro enterprises paid
only 10 percent of the market cost of the consulting services, small enterprises 20 percent, and medium
sized enterprises about 30 percent. The unsubsidized cost of the consulting services varied by firm size
but was equivalent to about US$57 3 per hour on average, amounting to US$11,856 per firm for one year
(4 hours for 52 weeks).
          Consulting firms were selected through a competitive bidding process. In response to a call for
proposals put out by IPPC, eleven consulting firms submitted proposals to participate in the program.
Two firms were eliminated based on inadequate references from former clients. The majority of the
participating firms were private local consulting firms that usually work with micro, small, and medium
sized enterprises. All consulting firms signed a contract with IPPC that required them to spend four
hours per week with each enterprise. IPPC monitored consultants by requiring consultants and


2
  As defined by the Mexican Ministry of the Economy, micro enterprises have up to 10 full-time employees. Small
enterprises have between 11 and 50 full-time employees in the manufacturing and services sectors and between
11 and 30 full-time employees in the commerce sector. Medium size enterprises have up to 100 full-time
employees in the service and commerce sectors and up to 250 full-time employees in the manufacturing sector.
3
  700 Mexican Pesos (MXP)

                                                      6
enterprises to periodically submit documentation related to the program. Enterprise owners also came
to IPPC’s offices in person every quarter to pay their share of the program costs, which provided an
opportunity to voice complaints. In addition, a local project supervisor from Innovations for Poverty
Action (IPA), who was living in Puebla to manage the project evaluation, conducted monitoring visits to
program enterprises.
        At the beginning of the program, principal decision makers from all program enterprises, as well
as most employees, completed a computerized test that determined their individual strengths and
talents. This test was based on Gallup’s StrengthFinder method and IPPC was licensed to conduct this
test in Puebla. IPPC encouraged enterprises to use the results of this test to help assign employees to
responsibilities based on their strengths as identified by the StrengthFinder method. The consultants
were trained to help the enterprises interpret and apply the results to their labor decisions. For
example, one talent was “communication ? whereas another was “operations ?. Employees with the
communication talent were particularly suited to interacting with clients, while employees with the
operations talent would do well at record keeping and accounting.
        Apart from the employee talent diagnostic, the content of the consulting varied across
enterprises depending on their needs. In order to gain an understanding of the issues that enterprises
worked on with their mentors, we conducted in-depth, qualitative case studies of eight treatment
enterprises. Table 1 lists the areas that these eight enterprises covered with their consultants, along
with the number of enterprises that worked on each topic. Almost all enterprises started by establishing
mission and vision statements with their consultants, setting specific goals for what they wanted to
achieve in the future and throughout the program. Most enterprises also worked on improving
accounting and record keeping (through training and/or use of new software), clearly assigning staff
responsibilities, and sales strategy and advertising. Apart from these common topics, the remaining
topics covered are diverse, including optimizing the number and location of points of sale, quality
control, access to credit or alternative financing solutions, pricing strategy, teamwork and leadership
training. This reflects the fact that the consultants tailored their advice to each enterprise’s individual
challenges, leading them to work on different areas with each enterprise.


3. Experimental Setup and Data
        IPPC advertised the program throughout the State of Puebla via business associations, at trade
fairs, and various media outlets in order to attract an initial sample of interested micro, small, and



                                                    7
medium enterprises. 4 The program was open to enterprises that were formally registered with the
government and were paying taxes. In response to the advertising, 432 enterprises expressed interest in
the program and signed a letter of interest.
        Data comes from two sources: first, a baseline and follow-up survey of these interested
enterprises was conducted between October and December 2007 (baseline) and between March 2009
and June 2009 (follow-up) 5. These surveys collected information on enterprise characteristics and
performance, as well as on business practices and characteristics of the enterprise’s principal decision
maker (typically the owner or manager). Second, from the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS), we
secured wage and employment data for two pre-intervention years (2005 and 2006) and for three post-
intervention years (2010, 2011, and 2012).
        Using data from the baseline survey, 150 enterprises were randomly selected to participate in
the program. 6 The randomization was stratified by sector (manufacturing, services, and commerce) and
enterprise size (micro, small, and medium-sized) 7, and was conducted through a Stata program that was
run on the premises of IPPC in the presence of government officials and a public notary, who certified
that the assignment to the treatment group was random, i.e., not re-run depending on any particular
assignment.

4
  We do not have data on the channel through which enterprises learned of the program, and thus cannot test any
theories of heterogeneity with respect to this.
5
  The baseline survey was conducted by a local professional survey firm under the supervision of the Mexico
country office of IPA. For the follow-up survey, IPA hired surveyors (graduate students and recent graduates)
directly. IPA trained the surveyors and our local project staff managed and supervised the implementation of the
follow-up survey.
6
  We originally had 434 observations in the randomization and assigned 150 of them to treatment, but we later
discovered that two firms had expressed interest in the program twice under separate names. For this reason, we
had to drop two observations, giving us 432 unique firms. In one of the cases, both separate names were in the
control group, and we dropped one of these. In the other case, one name was assigned to the treatment group
and the other to the control group. Here, we had to keep the firm in the treatment group since they had already
been notified that they had been randomly selected to participate in the program.
7
  Within strata, we re-randomized as follows. We first allocated firms to the treatment and control group based on
a randomly generated number. Using this allocation, we then calculated the maximum and the average t-statistics
on the differences in averages across the treatment and control groups for the following variables: Within Puebla
City dummy, business age, total asset value, profit margin, measured risk aversion, entrepreneurial spirit index,
currently has a loan from a financial institution dummy, principal decision maker’s hours worked, principal
decision maker’s age, principal decision maker’s gender, principal decision maker’s years of schooling, principal
decision maker is of indigenous background dummy, as well as two dummies indicating whether the firm has
participated in other IPPC programs. If the maximum t-statistic for these variables was higher than 1.25 or the
average t-statistic was higher than 0.35, we drew a new random number and allocated firms to the treatment and
control group based on this new number. We repeated this process until the maximum t-statistic was 1.25 or
lower and the average t-statistic was 0.35 or lower. Research by Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) that was conducted
after our randomization finds that this way of re-randomizing is no longer the preferred method. In our data
analysis, we make the necessary adjustments for the randomization method suggested by Bruhn and McKenzie,
i.e., in our regressions we control for all variables used in the re-randomization.

                                                        8
        Out of the 150 enterprises in the treatment group, 80 then took up the consulting services. 8 The
remaining 70 treatment group enterprises declined to participate in the program although they had
initially signed a letter of interest saying that they would participate if offered a spot. The take-up rate
was higher among enterprises in the services and manufacturing sectors (56.6% and 53.5%,
respectively), compared to enterprises in the commerce sector (48.7%). Most enterprises that chose not
to participate said their financial situation had changed since they signed the letter of interest and they
no longer had sufficient funds to pay the fee (albeit subsidized) for the consulting services. IPPC paired
the 80 treatment group enterprises that took-up the program with consulting firms according to the
consultants’ sector and enterprise-size expertise, as well as geographic restrictions. Figure 1 includes a
comprehensive project timeline, illustrating how the dates for data collection, randomization, and
program implementation line up.
        Table 2 provides summary statistics of baseline characteristics for enterprises and their principal
decision makers in the treatment and control groups. About 30% of enterprises in each group operated
in the manufacturing sector, 25% in the commerce sector, and 45% in the services sector. On average,
the enterprises in the study had about 14 full-time paid employees and were slightly over 10 years old.
The enterprises’ principal decision makers were on average 43 years old, 72% of them were men, and on
average completed 16 years of schooling.
        Panel C of Table 2 displays our main measures of business performance, starting with sales
(Appendix 1: Surveys and Data Definitions provides details of the survey questions and definitions). Our
baseline measure of sales is the average of monthly sales in July, August, and September 2007. 9 This
variable varies widely in our sample. At baseline, average sales in the treatment group were US$79,163
with a standard deviation of 288,679, and US$55,258 in the control group, with a standard deviation of
140,493. To reduce the noise in this variable, we winsorize the top 1% of outliers (i.e., we replace the
top one percent of sales with the 99th percentile of sales). The averages of winsorized sales are more
similar across the treatment and control groups (US$66,025 and US$54,923, respectively) than for the


8
  Due to an administrative error, there was also one control group firm that was invited to participate, and did, in
the program. For analysis purposes, we adhere to the random assignment and this enterprise is included in the
control group.
9
  About 2.5 percent of enterprises report zero sales for all three months (this percentage is not statistically
different across the treatment and control group). Since these enterprises report having employees, as well as
assets, and report non-zero hours worked and costs, we assume that they did not want to report their sales and
thus replaced their sales with missing (it is unlikely that they had zero sales in all three months and are still in
business). We apply the same procedure to the follow-up data, where about 3.5 percent of both treatment and
control enterprises report zero sales for all three months (December 2008, January 2009, and February 2009 in the
follow-up survey). Our measure of sales is thus greater than zero for all enterprises.

                                                         9
un-winsorized variables, although no differences are statistically significant for either the winsorized or
un-winsorized data.
        Our baseline measure of profits is calculated as September 2007 sales minus September 2007
costs (unlike sales, we only collected costs for one month in the surveys). 10
        We calculate two separate measures of enterprise productivity. The first is the residual from a
regression of log sales on log employees and log business assets. The second is return on assets (ROA),
defined as profits (calculated as sales minus costs) divided by business assets.
        Similarly to sales, the variances of profits, productivity, and ROA are large. For this reason, we
include the averages of the 1% winsorized variables in Table 2. We winsorized the top and bottom 1% of
outliers for profits, productivity, and ROA (unlike sales, profits, productivity, and ROA are not bounded
below by zero and have negative values, which is why we also winsorized the bottom 1%). After
winsorizing, average baseline profits are the same in the treatment and control group (about
US$10,000). Overall, we find no statistically significant differences in business performance variables at
baseline.
        Columns 4, 5, and 6 of Table 2 examine whether treatment group enterprises that took-up the
program were significantly different at baseline from treatment group enterprises that did not take-up
the program. We find that enterprises that took-up the program are more likely to be in manufacturing,
have a larger number of employees, are more likely to have male decision makers, and are older. In
addition, Panel C of Table 2 shows that enterprises that took-up the program were more productive at
baseline than enterprises that did not take-up the program.
        We conducted the follow-up survey between March and June 2009 (i.e., one to four months
after the intervention ended, which is 12-16 months after the intervention began), re-interviewing 378
enterprises or 88% of the 432 enterprises interviewed at baseline, to measure the impact of the
consulting services on business outcomes. Out of the 54 enterprises that could not be re-interviewed,
eleven enterprises were confirmed closed 11, 31 declined to participate in the interview 12 and seven
enterprises could not be tracked down despite repeated contact attempts. The remaining five


10
   de Mel et al. (2009) suggests asking business owners what their profits are in one simple question as an
alternative to calculating profits based on responses to specific components. We tried this approach but had a very
high non-response rate to this question.
11
   We verified with the former principal decision maker and/or neighbors that these enterprises had indeed closed.
The percentage of closed enterprises was lower in the treatment group (1.4%) than in the control group (3.3%).
However, the difference is not statistically significant.
12
   The percentage of enterprises that refused the interview was slightly higher in the control group (8.7%) than in
the treatment group (5.6%), but the difference is not statistically significant.

                                                        10
enterprises had merged with another enterprise—one of them with an enterprise outside our sample
and two with two other enterprises in the sample. For these five enterprises, we were not able to obtain
separate data for the unit corresponding to the original enterprise, and thus they are not included in the
analysis. We provide an analysis of attrition rates and correlates with baseline information in Appendix
Table 1. This analysis shows that there are no differential attrition rates in the follow-up survey across
treatment and control groups; neither do we see compositional shifts (Column 3) 13.
        Next, since all enterprises were formally registered with the tax authority, we secured
administrative employment data (number of employees and total wage bill) from the Mexican Social
Security Institute (IMSS), the equivalent of the US Social Security Administration. We collected each
firm’s taxpayer number (RFC) during our baseline and follow-up surveys. Using these RFC numbers, we
were able to obtain the mean and standard deviation in the treatment and control groups (but not
individual firm level data) for two years prior to the intervention and three years following.
        In Mexico, all enterprises are required to register their paid employees with IMSS, but in
practice, not all enterprises register their workers, even if the enterprise itself is registered with the tax
authority. Some enterprises also register only a fraction of their paid workers with IMSS. Close to 57% of
the enterprises in our sample were matched with IMSS records. In addition to under-registration, two
other potential reasons why enterprises are not found in the IMSS data are that (1) some firms in our
sample do not have paid employees and (2) some RFC numbers may contain typos, although we tried to
clean them up as much as possible. The percentage of matched enterprises is not statistically,
significantly different in the treatment and the control group (58.7% and 56.7%, respectively).
        We obtained IMSS data for two pre-intervention time periods (June 30, 2005 and June 30,
2006), as well as three post-intervention time periods (June 30, 2010, June 30, 2011, and June 30, 2012),
on (1) number of full-time employees, and (2) total daily wage bill paid to these employees. For
confidentiality reasons, IMSS staff could not share enterprise level data. Instead, they provided averages
and standard deviations for the treatment and control group. IMSS also provided a list of the firms that
had successfully been matched with their database. Appendix Table 2 reports attrition analysis for IMSS
data; we find neither differential attrition for treatment on average (Columns 1 and 2) nor compositional
changes (Column 3, aggregate p-value of 0.122 for the F-test of joint significance all interaction terms).
The analysis does suggest though that firms with a higher number of baseline employees are somewhat

13
  Not all enterprises that answered the follow-up survey responded to each question. For this reason, our business
outcome variables are missing for part of the sample. We tested whether the likelihood of having missing business
outcomes variables due to either attrition or non-response differed significantly across the treatment and control
group and do not find this to be the case.

                                                       11
more likely to be found in the IMSS data in the control group compared to the treatment group. For this
reason, average employment in the IMSS data before the intervention, i.e., both in 2005 and 2006, is
higher in the control group (about 8 full-time employees) than in the treatment group (6.2 full-time
employees).


4. Results and Discussion
        Table 3 reports the main specification, using OLS to compare treatment to control in the cross-
section. All regressions include controls for the variables used for stratification (both the strata dummies
as well as the re-randomization variables 14 as suggested in Bruhn and McKenzie (2009), and a control for
the timing of the survey 15). In Column 1 we estimate the average intent to treat effect without
controlling for the baseline value of the outcome variable, and in Column 2 we report the average intent
to treat effect with controlling for the baseline value of the outcome variable. For observations where
the baseline value of the outcome is missing, we replace this value with zero and include a dummy
variable indicating that the value is missing, in order to keep the observation in the sample.


4.1 Business Performance, Short Run and Long Run
        Table 3 Columns 1 and 2 both show no short-term significant treatment effect on employment,
sales, or profits. However, the results suggest that the consulting improved enterprise productivity as
measured by the residual from a productivity regression and also as measured by return on assets
(ROA), by about one fifth of a standard deviation for both measures (s.e. = 0.11 standard deviations and
0.13 standard deviations, respectively). We performed three robustness checks of the results, which are
reported in Appendix Tables 4, 5, and 6. First, we winsorized the outcome variables at the 1% and 5%
levels to check whether the results are driven by outliers (Appendix Table 4). Second, we run all
regressions only on the sample of 221 enterprises that report all outcomes variables at follow-up
(Appendix Table 5). Third, we estimate a difference-in-difference specification, rather than a cross-
sectional specification (Appendix Table 6). The robustness checks show very similar results to the ones

14
   Due to baseline data entry typos that were discovered and corrected after the randomization took place, a few
values of the variables included in the randomization procedure do not correspond to the true baseline values. The
strata dummies and re-randomization controls included in the regressions contain the values originally used in the
randomization procedure. All other baseline data used in the summary statistics and regressions contains the
correct baseline values.
15
   Appendix Table 3 shows that 70.4% of treatment group enterprises and 62.6% of control group enterprises were
interviewed in March (p=0.12). Almost all of remaining enterprises were interviewed in April 2009 or May 2009,
with only four enterprises being interviewed in June 2009. Treatment and control enterprises are equally likely to
have been interviewed either in March or April (percentage point difference of 1.3 and p-value of 0.66).

                                                       12
reported in Table 3 16. In results not shown, we also found the results are not heterogeneous with
respect to size of firm, however, statistical power is limited for this test.
        One concern with the outcome data from the follow-up survey is that since the information is
self-reported, treatment enterprises could have reported more positive outcomes to please the
surveyors (for transparency reasons, enterprises were informed that the survey was linked to the
consulting program). To address this concern, we test whether (1) treatment enterprises were more
likely to provide alternative contact persons on the survey 17, and (2) treatment enterprises were less
likely to not report sales on the follow-up survey, which should be the case if they wanted to please the
interviewer. Appendix Table 8 displays the results for these tests. We find no significant differences in
both measures across the treatment and control group, although we recognize that these are not
dispositive tests.
        Table 4 reports the long run impact on employment. As discussed above, for privacy reasons we
do not have individual firm data, but rather just average number of employees and average wage bill for
five years, separately for our treatment and control groups. Having administrative records rather than
self-reported firm data we consider to be a major advantage and reconfirmation of our results. Given
the five years of data, we use a difference-in-difference specification, with the treatment effect being
identified by the interaction of treatment and post. We find an increase of 4.4 employees (s.e. = 1.7),
which corresponds to 44% (average number of employees in the control group is 10.1 in the three post
years), and an increase of US$99 in the daily wage bill (s.e. = $44), which is 57% (average daily wage bill
in the control group is $172 in the three post years).
        Figures 2 and 3 illustrate these results graphically. They show that both the average number of
employees and the daily wage bill were similar across the treatment and control groups before the
consulting program was implemented (in 2005 and 2006). Two to three years after the program (in 2011
and 2012), the average number of employees and the average daily wage bill were about 45 and 55
percent higher in the treatment group than in the control group, respectively.


16
   As an additional check, Appendix Table 7 displays average business outcomes from the follow-up survey in the
treatment and control group, as well as in the group of treatment enterprises that took up the program. A simple
comparison of follow-up survey means in the treatment and control group shows a positive effect of the consulting
services on productivity. Comparing only enterprises that took up the program to control group enterprises shows
even larger differences in both productivity and return on assets (this comparison is not causal, and in particular
note that at baseline the enterprises that took-up the program already had higher productivity and return on
assets than enterprises that did not take-up the program, as shown in Table 2).
17
   We asked for alternative contact persons in case we needed to get in touch with the enterprises at a later stage
for clarifications or additional questions and could not reach the enterprise through our contact information on
record.

                                                        13
        A caveat here is that when we compare number of full-time employees from the IMSS data to
our follow-up survey data, the IMSS numbers are lower, suggesting that the enterprises in our sample
did not register all their employees with IMSS (the follow-up survey suggests that our enterprises had
about 15 full-time paid employees in 2009, and 2010 IMSS data shows about 10 employees). The
increase in number of employees in the IMSS data could thus reflect more employees being registered
instead of more employees being hired (this still is a desirable outcome though from a societal
perspective). However, given that the increase in employees recorded in the IMSS data is long term, not
merely a short-term increase after the training, it appears to be a genuine increase in actual
employment at these firms.
        Not all of the firms in our sample were found in IMSS records, so that the results in Table 4 are
based on about 57 percent of our sample. To assess whether there are important compositional changes
that influence our key results, Appendix Table 9 reports the main specifications for impact as measured
by the follow-up survey, but restricted to the sample of firms for which we have IMSS data. The results
are similar.


4.2 Process Variables
        In order to investigate the channels that drive the observed treatment effects, we now study
how the consulting program changed processes within the enterprise. We measure these processes as
follows. First, the surveys asked enterprise owners whether or not they implemented certain changes
during the past year, such as developing new products, attracting new investors, and launching a new
marketing campaign. Note that if treatment enterprises believed they should please the program by
reporting process changes that did not actually occur, these estimates will be upwardly biased.
        Table 5 displays the treatment effects on business process variables. We start with an all-
encompassing standardized index, calculated as per Kling et al. (2007), and are not able to reject the null
hypothesis of no change (0.072 standard deviation, s.e. = 0.104). We only find statistically significant
improvements in two processes: made a new marketing effort (13 percentage points increase, s.e. = 5.5
percentage points) and the percent of enterprises that keep formal accounts (7 percentage points
increase, s.e. = 3 percentage points, where “formal ? is defined as using either an accountant or a
computerized system as opposed to keeping handwritten records or no notes at all). The finding that the
program increased marketing efforts and the use of formal accounting practices is consistent with the
case study evidence mentioned above, which suggests that many enterprises worked with their mentors
on accounting and record keeping, as well as sales strategy and advertising.

                                                    14
        Other processes examined, such as registering a patent, developing new products, or attracting
new investors, do not appear to be changed significantly. These could be more difficult to detect since
they are more heterogeneous across enterprises, or require a longer time to change than is observable
in the treatment period. To measure human resource management practices, we created an index using
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) based on the six questions listed in Appendix 1 18. We are not able to
reject the null hypothesis of no effect on this index (-0.062, s.e. = 0.152). In summary, since the content
of the consulting was tailored to each firm’s needs it is perhaps not surprising that we do not see
improvements in most individual processes, nor the collection on average.


4.3 Entrepreneurial Spirit
        We constructed an entrepreneurial spirit index, developed in collaboration with IPPC. This index
is based on the answers to the eight questions listed in Appendix 1, which intend to capture
entrepreneurial attitudes of the principal decision maker, and is generated using PCA, and then a
standardized index using the Kling et al. (2007) method. Thus the indices are a combined measure of
answers to a set of questions on the enterprise owner’s beliefs about their ability to control the success
of their business (or whether they are merely subject to external forces outside of their control) and on
the owner’s drive for success.
        Table 6 reports the results. We find a positive and statistically significant impact using the PCA
method (0.237, s.e. = 0.140) and positive but not statistically significant impact using the Kling et al.
method (0.130 standard deviation increase, s.e. = 0.103). The increase in this index might reflect the fact
that enterprise owners set new goals as part of the program and that consultants helped to provide
motivation and strategy for how to achieve these goals. In addition, enterprise owners’ increased
confidence in their ability to control the success of their business could be driven by having better
command of management tools such as marketing and bookkeeping.
        We cannot distinguish whether the training had a direct effect on entrepreneurial spirit (e.g.,
enterprise owners set new goals as part of the program and that consultants helped to provide
motivation and strategy for how to achieve these goals), or whether the improvements in the business
that led to higher productivity then improved the spirit of the entrepreneurs. Two of the questions used


18
  All PCA indices in this paper were created in Stata using the “pca ? command. This command computes the
leading eigenvectors from the eigen decomposition of the covariance matrix of the variables used to create the
index. We choose the first eigenvector as our PCA index. In other words, the PCA index is a weighted linear
combination of the underlying variables, where the weights are optimal in the sense that they give the index the
largest possible variance.

                                                        15
to construct the index we believe are particularly subject to this second interpretation (Questions d and
e in Appendix 1). As a robustness check, we construct the index without these two questions, and the
results do not change.


4.4 Response to Economic Shocks
        The program could have also improved enterprise performance by helping enterprises to better
cope with the 2008 economic crisis. In the follow-up survey, about 89% of enterprises—both in the
treatment and control group—reported that they had been affected by the crisis. We asked these
enterprises what changes they made in response to the crisis. Table 7 reports the answers to these
questions and examines whether the responses differed across the treatment and control groups. The
results show that treatment enterprises are eight percentage points (s.e. = 4 percentage points) less
likely than control enterprises to report that they had to cut production in response to the crisis. The
ability to weather shocks more effectively could be a result of being able to more proactively engage in
marketing activities and better control finances, as shown in the previous section. Enterprises that are
less well trained in these skills might experience economic shocks more passively and do not have tools
to counteract a shortfall in demand.
        Other changes in response to the crisis were not statistically significant across the treatment and
control groups, but one of magnitude (but not statistical significance) to note is a positive impact on
seeking government assistance (a 5.6 percentage points increase, s.e. = 4.4 percentage points, relative
to an average of 12.8% in the control group). For enterprises that reported seeking government
assistance, we asked which program or agency they contacted and most answers indicated state or
federal programs that provide funding or subsidies to micro, small, and medium sized enterprises.


5. Cost-Effectiveness: Why Don’t More Enterprises Use Consulting Services?
        Given the large increases in productivity, and eventual growth in employees, we ask why more
firms do not use consulting services. In particular, a cost-effectiveness calculation suggests that the
returns to hiring a consultant may be well worth the cost. The measured effect of the program on the
daily wage bill of U$99 implies an increase in the annual wage bill of US$99 x 365 = US$36,135. The
annual cost of the consulting services was US$11,856. Since the program was highly subsidized,
participating enterprises only had to pay between 10% and 30% of this cost (depending on firm size).
Among the enterprises in the treatment group, only 53% chose to participate in the subsidized
consulting program once offered a spot. Although we do not attempt to translate the job growth to firm

                                                    16
profits, given the relative magnitude, we note that the annual return on labor to the firm need not be
very high in order to justify the one-time consulting expenditure.
        Several issues may hinder the market for consulting services. First, there may be no failure at all:
those who opt-in may be the ones who can benefit, and those who do not opt-in would not benefit.
Naturally we do not observe what the impact would have been on those who do not opt-in, but given
the large increase in productivity and long term employment on simply the intent-to-treat, there seems
to remain a failure for those who did opt-in, in that they had not taken-up the services before, even at
the unsubsidized rate. It is important to emphasize that all enterprises in our study had initially
expressed interest in the subsidized consulting program, and that their views are thus not
representative of enterprises that do not have a pre-existing interest in consulting services. It could be
that firms expressed an interest, learned more about the service, and then decided that this was unlikely
to yield profitable results for them, and thus failure to take-up remains a rational and correct decision.
        Second, there may be a credit market failure. In fact, most of the enterprises in the treatment
group that declined participation in the program once offered a spot gave liquidity constraints as the
reason. However, this does not fully satisfy the question: Why do we not observe consulting firms
accepting delayed payment or working with financial services firms to provide credit to cover their
services? Either way, it suggests a credit market failure is the source of the problem for some
enterprises. This may be particularly relevant given the timing of the impacts, i.e., in the short run we do
not observe higher profits but rather increased productivity. It is not until the long run that we see
evidence of likely increase in firm size that could be useful for generating liquidity to pay for consulting
services.
        Third, entrepreneurs may be risk- or ambiguity-averse with respect to the potential returns from
hiring a consultant. This could be perpetuated by lack of information in the market on the returns to
consulting advice (and which consulting firms have difficulty credibly signaling).
        To examine this issue, in the follow-up survey we included some qualitative questions for the
control group on whether they were using any consulting or mentoring services, and if not, why not.
About 21% of control group enterprises said that they were indeed using some services and provided
the name of the consulting firm they were using. Examining these names reveals that only about half of
these firms offer management consulting services similar to the consulting firms that worked with the
treatment group enterprises. The other firms mentioned by the control group provide specialized
services, such as accounting or technical assistance. Overall, the incidence of using management
consulting services in the control group appears to be around 10%. Table 8 lists the self-reported

                                                    17
reasons why control group enterprises do not use consulting services. By far, the most frequently
mentioned reason is lack of funds (46.3% of enterprises mention this reason), followed by uncertainty
about the benefits of consulting services (22.2%), and simply not having considered hiring a consultant
(18.5%). The response could be genuine disinterest in consulting services or ambiguity about a service
whose quality is not assured. Our findings indicate that management consulting services can have high
returns for micro, small, and medium enterprises, and we consider funding constraints and uncertainty
about the benefits to be the most likely explanations for the lack of market transactions in consulting
services.


6. Discussion and Conclusion
         Our results suggest that lack of managerial skills constitutes a significant constraint to firm
growth and the ability of micro, small, and medium enterprises to withstand economic shocks. The
documented effects of the experiment on productivity and return on assets in the short run, and
employment in the long run, are large. However, the short run impact on productivity and return on
assets, albeit significant at standard 10% levels, is similar to smaller point estimates from other studies.
Thus, while we believe the magnitude of the impact is not unreasonable given that many enterprises in
the sample had not received any formal management training prior to our intervention, we note that
the confidence intervals exclude zero but also include fairly small but positive treatment effects.
         The improvements seem to be most focused around improvements in marketing and financial
controls. Consultants also appear to have helped enterprises to set clear goals and define a strategy for
how to achieve these goals. We see that the overall “entrepreneurial spirit ? of confidence of the owners
increases significantly as a result of the intervention. However, the evidence on any one specific
mechanism is weak, with most individual dimensions of management practices not showing any
significant impact. Although it would be desirable to identify specific mechanisms, we conjecture that
such a one size fits all solution is not realistic. 19
         Overall, our results confirm that managerial inputs have a large and important impact on firm
performance and even hiring decisions in the intermediate run. However, there is still much to learn
about the way this information affects firm performance as a whole, and more specifically, how it
interacts with the marginal productivity of inputs such as labor and capital. In addition, while there may

19
  A study that separately taught or tackled one type of problem at a time is likely an unrealistic method for
conducting randomized trials, as it would require massive sample sizes to tease out each mechanism separately.
Even then, the external validity of any one discovered magic mechanism would be at risk of being context specific
(e.g., to that particular regulatory, industry, macroeconomic, political, or natural resource environment).

                                                         18
be a lot of heterogeneity in effects, our sample is not large enough to allow us to look at all the firm
level interactions that might be of interest, such as the competitive nature of the industry and sector;
the age and gender of the owner; and the owner’s ambition level, risk taking ability, or general skill
levels. We believe this is a critical area for further research.




References

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2009. “The Miracle of
         Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation ?. Working paper.
Bennedsen, Morten, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2007.
         “Inside the Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance. ?
         Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2): 647–691.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar. 2003. “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on
         Firm Policies. ? Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4): 1169–1208.
Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. 2011. “Does
         Management Matter? Evidence From India. ? World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
         5573.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
         Firms and Countries. ? Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4): 1341–1408.
———. 2010. “Why Do Management Practices Differ Across Firms and Countries? ? Journal of Economic
         Perspectives 24 (1): 203–224.
Bruhn, Miriam, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar. 2010. “What Capital Is Missing in Developing
         Countries? ? American Economic Review 100 (2) (May): 629–633. doi:10.1257/aer.100.2.629.
Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie. 2009. “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in
         Development Field Experiments. ? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (4): 200–
         232.
Bruhn, Miriam, and Bilal Zia. 2011. “Stimulating Managerial Capital in Emerging Markets: The Impact of
         Business and Financial Literacy for Young Entrepreneurs. ? World Bank Policy Research Working
         Paper No. 5642.
Caselli, Francesco, and Nicola Gennaioli. 2005. “Dynastic Management. ? Economic Inquiry, Forthcoming.
Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia. 2011. “Prices or Knowledge? What Drives Demand for
         Financial Services in Emerging Markets? ? Journal of Finance 66 (6): 1933–1967.
Gine, Xavier, and Ghazala Mansuri. 2011. “Money or Ideas? A Field Experiment on Constraints to
         Entrepreneurship in Rural Pakistan. ?
Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. 2005. “Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public
         Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999. ? Journal of Finance 60 (2): 577–
         614.
Karlan, Dean, Isaac Osei-Akoto, Robert Darko Osei, and Christopher R. Udry. 2012. “Agricultural
         Decisions After Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints. ? Yale University Economic Growth Center
         Working Paper. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2169548. http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=2169548.
Karlan, Dean, and Martin Valdivia. 2011. “Teaching Entrepreneurship: Impact of Business Training on
         Microfinance Clients and Institutions. ? Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (2): 510–527.


                                                       19
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2011. “Microcredit in Theory and Practice: Using Randomized Credit
         Scoring for Impact Evaluation. ? Science 332 (6035) (June 10): 1278–1284.
King, R. G., and R. Levine. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right. ? The Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 108 (3) (August 1): 717–737. doi:10.2307/2118406.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
         Effects. ? Econometrica 75 (1) (January): 83–120.
de Mel, Suresh, David J. McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2009. “Measuring Microenterprise
         Profits: Must We Ask How the Sausage Is Made? ? Journal of Development Economics 88 (1)
         (January): 19–31. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2008.01.007.
de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Returns to Capital in
         Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment. ? Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4):
         1329–1372.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth. ? American Economic
         Review 88 (3): 559–586.




                                                 20
                                                           Figure 1: Timeline




        Figure 2: Average Number of Employees in the Treatment and Control Group over Time
                                      (Administrative Data)
                                     16
                                                                       Program implementation




                                     14
               Nubmer of employees




                                     12
                                     10
                                      8
                                      6
                                      4
                                      2
                                      0
                                          2005   2006    2007    2008                           2009   2010     2011      2012
                                                                                 Year

                                             Treatment group average                              Control group average

Source: Administrative data on from the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS). Includes only the 253 firms
in our sample that were found in IMSS records (89 treatment group firms and 164 control group firms).




                                                                   21
        Figure 3: Average Daily Wage Bill (USD) in the Treatment and Control Group over Time
                                        (Administrative Data)
                                       350




                                                                           Program implementation
                                       300
               Daily wage bill (USD)   250
                                       200
                                       150
                                       100
                                       50
                                        0
                                              2005    2006    2007    2008                          2009   2010    2011      2012
                                                                                      Year

                                                 Treatment group average                             Control group average

Source: Administrative data on from the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS). Includes only the 253 firms
in our sample that were found in IMSS records (89 treatment group firms and 164 control group firms).




                                             Table 1: Topics that Firms Worked on with Their Consultant
                                              Based on Eight Qualitative Case Studies of Treated Firms
 Topic                                                                                                            # of firms that covered this topic
 Define mission and vision statements                                                                                              6
 Accounting and record keeping (training and/or new software)                                                                      5
 Clarify organizational structure, clearly assign responsibilities                                                                 5
 Sales strategy and advertising (marketing)                                                                                        4
 Strategically select location and number of sales points                                                                          2
 Quality control                                                                                                                   2
 Access to credit or alternative financing solutions                                                                               2
 Human resources management and hiring practices                                                                                   2
 Mediate family problems in family firms                                                                                           1
 Pricing strategy                                                                                                                  1
 Reduce costs (negotiate with suppliers, find alternative suppliers)                                                               1
 Figure out which products are most profitable and focus on these                                                                  1
 Team work and communications training for employees                                                                               1
 Leadership training for firm owners                                                                                               1




                                                                       22
                                    Table 2: Baseline Summary Statistics and Take-Up Analysis
                                                  Mean and Standard Deviations

                                                                         Orthogonality
                                                                          Verification
                                                                             (1)-(2)                              (4)-(5)
                                                                          Difference                 Did Not    Difference
                                               Treatment      Control      (p-value)      Took-up    Take-up    (std. err.)
Panel A: Stratification variables                  (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)
Manufacturing sector dummy                        0.300        0.323         -0.023         0.363      0.229      0.134*
                                                 (0.460)      (0.468)       (0.630)        (0.484)    (0.423)    (0.075)
Commerce sector dummy                             0.253        0.230          0.023         0.225      0.286      -0.061
                                                 (0.436)      (0.422)       (0.597)        (0.420)    (0.455)    (0.397)
Services sector dummy                             0.447        0.447          0.000         0.413      0.486      -0.073
                                                 (0.499)      (0.498)       (0.998)        (0.495)    (0.503)    (0.372)
Full-time paid employees                         14.400       13.684          0.716        18.825      9.343      9.482*
                                                (30.887)     (31.479)       (0.821)       (36.288)   (22.444)    (0.060)
Panel B: Re-randomization variables
Principal decision maker's age (years)           42.561       42.876         -0.315        42.443     42.696      -0.253
                                                (10.212)      (9.878)       (0.756)        (9.540)   (10.999)    (0.881)
Male principal decision maker dummy               0.727        0.720          0.007         0.800      0.643     0.157**
                                                 (0.447)      (0.450)       (0.881)        (0.403)    (0.483)    (0.031)
Principal decision maker's yrs of schooling      15.630       15.932         -0.302        16.138     15.050       1.088
                                                 (4.919)      (5.196)       (0.559)        (4.472)    (5.358)    (0.177)
Business age (years)                             11.053       13.652         -2.599        12.825      9.029     3.796**
                                                (10.330)     (28.120)       (0.275)       (11.501)    (8.437)    (0.024)
N                                                  150          282            432           80         70          150
Note: Columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 present means and standard deviations (in parentheses). Column 3 shows the difference in
means across the treatment and control group with the corresponding p-value in parentheses. Column 6 shows the
difference in means across treatment enterprises that did and did not take-up the program with the corresponding p-value
in parentheses. Significance levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.




                                                               23
                          Table 2: Baseline Summary Statistics and Take-Up Analysis (continued)
                                              Mean and Standard Deviations

                                                                 Orthogonality
                                                                  Verification
                                                                      (1)-(2)                       Did Not       (4)-(5)
                                                                   Difference       Took-up         Take-up     Difference
Panel C: Other variables           Treatment         Control        (p-value)      Treatment       Treatment    (std. err.)
- Business outcomes                     (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)         (6)
Avg. sales Jul, Aug, and Sep 2007    79.163          55.258          23.905         105.916          48.260       57.656
(1000s USD)                        (288.679)       (140.493)         (0.286)       (349.912)       (194.184)     (0.267)
Avg. sales Jul, Aug, and Sep 2007    66.025          54.923          11.102          84.114          45.129       38.985
(1000s USD), 1% winsorized         (188.367)       (137.581)         (0.520)       (200.838)       (172.209)     (0.250)
Sep 2007 costs (1000s USD)           44.565          56.216          -11.651         58.736          26.974       31.762
                                   (120.341)       (263.955)         (0.633)       (145.907)        (75.425)     (0.135)
Sep 2007 costs (1000s USD),          44.275          40.049           4.226          58.212          26.974       31.238
                                   (118.714)        (95.965)         (0.709)       (143.516)        (75.425)     (0.136)
Profits (Sep 2007 sales minus        13.281           -3.797         17.078           8.375          19.365      -10.991
costs, 1000s USD)                  (112.277)       (204.743)         (0.411)        (87.198)       (137.923)     (0.609)
Profits (Sep 2007 sales minus        10.220          10.156           0.064          11.144            9.075      2.069
costs, 1000s USD), 1% winsorized    (74.720)        (75.010)         (0.994)        (72.355)        (78.279)     (0.885)
Business assets (1000s USD),        296.964         945.842         -648.879        341.570         246.574       94.996
1% winsorized                      (767.969)      (7822.005)         (0.376)       (779.399)       (758.949)     (0.510)
Business assets (1000s USD),        295.337         331.749          -36.412        338.505         246.574       91.931
1% winsorized                      (756.984)       (770.078)         (0.685)       (758.886)       (758.949)     (0.518)
Productivity residual                  0.028          -0.016          0.045           0.439           -0.437    0.876***
                                     (1.349)         (1.253)         (0.787)         (1.477)         (1.017)     (0.001)
Productivity residual,                 0.031          -0.015          0.046           0.444           -0.437    0.881***
1% winsorized                        (1.317)         (1.239)         (0.776)         (1.419)         (1.017)     (0.001)
Return on assets (ROA)                -0.026          0.152           -0.178          0.160           -0.254     0.414**
                                     (0.956)         (0.817)         (0.120)         (0.366)         (1.342)     (0.042)
Return on assets (ROA),                0.033          0.118           -0.085          0.160           -0.121     0.281**
 1% winsorized                       (0.596)         (0.640)         (0.305)         (0.366)         (0.770)     (0.026)
N                                       150            282             432             80               70          150
Note: Columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 present means and standard deviations (in parentheses). Column 3 shows the difference in
means across the treatment and control group with the corresponding p-value in parentheses. Column 6 shows the
difference in means across treatment enterprises that did and did not take-up the program with the corresponding p-value
in parentheses. For the 1% winsorized variables, sales, costs, and assets are only winsorized at the top 1% since they are
bounded below by zero. All other variables are winsorized at the top and bottom 1%. Significance levels: *10 percent, **5
percent, ***1 percent.




                                                            24
               Table 3: ITT Treatment Effect Estimates, Short-Run Business Outcomes
                                                 OLS
                                                                                            Control
                                                                      ITT treatment          group
                                                                     effect estimates        mean
Outcome variable                                                                          (std. dev.)
                                                                        (1)     (2)            (3)
Full-time paid employees                                               1.475  0.516         12.428
                                                                     (1.421) (1.260)       (22.281)
                                                                        378    378             243
Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 (1000s USD)                     -5.108 -11.886        63.384
                                                                    (15.452) (10.876)     (163.643)
                                                                        307    307             200
Log (Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 in 1000s USD)               0.006  0.050           2.391
                                                                     (0.175) (0.144)        (2.023)
                                                                        307    307             200
Feb 2009 costs (1000s USD)                                             5.525  5.657         43.157
                                                                    (14.694) (14.551)     (113.758)
                                                                        304    304             204
Profits (Feb 2009 sales minus costs, 1000s USD)                        5.802  5.330         11.460
                                                                     (5.831) (5.705)       (97.044)
                                                                        265    265             176
Log (business assets)                                                 -0.055  -0.106          4.307
                                                                     (0.176) (0.157)        (1.699)
                                                                        319    319             203
Productivity residual                                                0.270*   0.250*         -0.095
 Residual from regression of log Feb 2009 sales                      (0.141) (0.130)        (1.272)
 on log employees and log business assets                               250    250             174
Return on assets (ROA)                                               0.105*   0.098           0.012
 Feb 2009 sales minus costs divided by assets                        (0.060) (0.064)        (0.471)
                                                                        236    236             154
Controls for baseline value of outcome                                  No      Yes             -

Note: Each row in Columns 1 and 2 contains the treatment effect point estimate, robust standard
error, and number of observations, for a separate OLS estimation. For the regressions that control
for the outcome variable measured at baseline (Column 2), when the baseline outcome variable is
missing, the missing value is filled-in with zero and a dummy variable indicating that the baseline
observation is missing is added to the model. All regressions include controls for strata dummies and
re-randomization variables, as well as a dummy for having been surveyed in March 2009 (vs. April,
May or June) at follow-up. Column 3 contains means and standard deviations for the control group
at follow-up. Significance levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.




                                                  25
                          Table 4: ITT Treatment Effect Estimates, Long-Run Business Outcomes
                                              Difference-in-Difference OLS
Panel A: ITT Regression results                                        Outcome Variable
                                                    Number of employees                 Daily wage bill (USD)
                                                (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)            (6)
Treatment*Post                                                        4.429**                                98.74*
                                                                      (1.686)                               (43.594)
Treatment (=1 if mean is for treatment group)                        -1.766**                              -30.602**
                                                                      (0.540)                               (10.379)
Post (=1 for years 2010, 2011, and 2012)                             2.148***                               35.191**
                                                                      (0.541)                               (10.182)
                                                                        7.991***
Constant                                                                                                       136.76***
                                                                         (0.537)                                (7.251)
Number of observations                                                     10                                     10
                                            Treatment       Control                 Treatment      Control
                                               Mean          Mean      Difference      Mean         Mean       Difference
Panel B: Raw data                            (Std Dev)     (Std Dev)    (P-value)    (Std Dev)    (Std Dev)     (P-value)

2005                                          6.169         7.402         -1.234       98.02       128.81         -30.79
                                             (13.226)      (16.490)      (0.544)     (154.126)    (248.604)      (0.289)
2006                                          6.281         8.579         -2.298      114.29       144.70         -30.41
                                             (11.865)      (18.853)      (0.298)     (159.164)    (293.049)      (0.365)
2010                                          9.787         10.262        -0.476      162.98       161.89          1.09
                                             (35.958)      (21.181)      (0.895)     (353.039)    (311.735)      (0.980)
2011                                          14.067        10.098        3.970       263.02       169.10         93.92
                                             (66.707)      (19.916)      (0.480)     (717.155)    (321.992)      (0.153)
2012                                          14.551        10.055        4.496       294.252      184.856       109.40
                                             (67.984)      (20.668)      (0.434)     (798.781)    (343.924)      (0.131)
Number of enterprises                           89           164           253          89           164           253

Note: Administrative data from Mexico's Social Security Institute (IMSS) for years 2005, 2006, 2010, 2011, and 2012. All
enterprises are required by law to register their workers with IMSS (although compliance is not universal). 57% of the
enterprises in our sample were found in IMSS records. Both number of employees and daily wage bill refer to permanent
employees with pay. Column 3 in Panel A displays the results from a regression of mean number of employees on a
dummy for the mean being for the treatment group, a dummy for the post-consulting intervention period, and the
interaction of these two dummies. Column 6 in Panel A shows results for the corresponding regression with the mean
daily wage bill as the outcome variable. Panel B displays the raw data, where the means in Columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 are the
observations used in the regressions in Panel A.




                                                           26
                           Table 5: ITT Treatment Effect Estimates, Business Processes
                                                       OLS
                                                                                                Control group
                                                      ITT Treatment Effect
                                                                               Observations         mean
                                                            Estimates
Outcome variable                                                                                 (std. dev.)
                                                        (1)         (2)            (3)                 (4)
                                                       0.072       0.035           378               -0.036
Index of all process measures listed below
                                                      (0.104)     (0.098)                           (0.975)

Index components
Developed new products during last year dummy          -0.048      -0.046          378               0.531
                                                      (0.055)     (0.053)                           (0.500)
Attracted new clients during last year dummy           -0.020      -0.033          376               0.789
                                                      (0.046)     (0.045)                           (0.409)
Implemented new process during last year dummy         -0.062      -0.070          378               0.617
                                                      (0.053)     (0.052)                           (0.487)
Attracted new investors during last year dummy          0.027      0.024           378               0.074
                                                      (0.032)     (0.031)                           (0.262)
Began process to register a patent during last year     0.045                      376               0.079
dummy                                                 (0.034)                                       (0.270)
Began certification process for an international       -0.024                      378               0.156
standard (e.g. ISO)                                   (0.035)                                       (0.364)
Made new marketing effort during last year            0.129**                      378               0.440
dummy                                                 (0.055)                                       (0.497)
Expanded installations during last year dummy          -0.030                      377               0.240
                                                      (0.045)                                       (0.428)
Remodeled installations during last year dummy          0.022                      377               0.459
                                                      (0.054)                                       (0.499)
Human resources management index                       -0.062      -0.061          363               0.022
                                                      (0.152)     (0.146)                           (1.450)
Keeps formal accounts dummy                           0.076**     0.069**          378               0.852
                                                      (0.030)     (0.029)                           (0.356)
Controls for baseline value of outcome                   No          Yes                               -

Note: The index follows the methodology in Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) and is the normalized average of z-
scores for all non-missing process measures, using mean and standard deviation in the control group to calculate
the z-scores. Each row in Columns 1 and 2 contains the treatment effect point estimates and robust standard
errors for separate OLS estimations. All regressions include controls for strata dummies and re-randomization
variables, as well as a dummy for having been surveyed in March 2009 (vs. April, May or June) at follow-up. Some
variables are not available at baseline, which is why the corresponding cells in Colum 2 are empty. Column 4
contains means and standard deviations for the control group at follow-up. Significance levels: *10 percent, **5
percent, ***1 percent.




                                                       27
                                 Table 6: ITT Treatment Effect Estimates, Entrepreneurial Spirit
                                                              OLS
                                                                                                                    Control
                                                                       ITT Treatment Effect                          group
                                                                                                   Observations
                                                                             Estimates                               mean
Outcome variable                                                                                                  (std. dev.)
                                                                         (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)
                                                                       0.237*         0.223            373           -0.094
PCA entrepreneurial spirit index
                                                                       (0.140)       (0.139)                        (1.371)
                                                                       0.240*         0.208            373           -0.095
PCA entrepreneurial spirit index w/o components d and e
                                                                       (0.140)       (0.138)                        (1.343)
                                                                        0.130         0.128            378           -0.055
KLK entrepreneurial spirit index
                                                                       (0.103)       (0.102)                        (0.964)
                                                                        0.153         0.140            378           -0.064
KLK entrepreneurial spirit index w/o components d and e
                                                                       (0.107)       (0.105)                        (0.961)

Index components
a. I have professional goals.                                          0.114*        0.112*            378          4.531
                                                                       (0.060)       (0.060)                       (0.651)
b. I revise my goals periodically.                                       0.128         0.115           378          4.029
                                                                       (0.085)       (0.082)                       (0.840)
c. If I don’t reach a goal in the way I wanted to I try again.          -0.033        -0.035           378          4.374
                                                                       (0.077)       (0.077)                       (0.683)
d. I can’t motivate my business partners.^                               0.064         0.055           376          2.277
                                                                       (0.121)       (0.121)                       (1.086)
e. Everything I need for success lies in myself.                         0.074         0.090           378          3.938
                                                                       (0.112)       (0.108)                       (1.025)
f. I prefer to do routine tasks instead of doing something new in       -0.013        -0.017           376          2.000
my work.^                                                              (0.104)       (0.103)                       (0.964)
g. I think the government should give me opportunities.^                -0.061        -0.075           377          3.545
                                                                       (0.139)       (0.132)                       (1.215)
h. I have to reach some goals every day to feel satisfied.               0.126         0.114           378          3.897
                                                                       (0.109)       (0.107)                       (1.076)
Controls for baseline value of outcome                                    No            Yes                           -

Note: Components marked with ^ are reverse coded in the indices. The PCA index is generated using Principal Components
Analysis. The KLK index follows the methodology in Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) and is the normalized average of z-
scores for all non-missing process measures, using mean and standard deviation in the control group to calculate the z-
scores. Each row in Columns 1 and 2 contains the treatment effect point estimates and robust standard errors for separate
OLS estimations. All regressions include controls for strata dummies and re-randomization variables, as well as a dummy
for having been surveyed in March 2009 (vs. April, May or June) at follow-up. Column 4 contains means and standard
deviations for the control group at follow-up. Significance levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.



                                                                 28
               Table 7: ITT Treatment Effect Estimates, Changes in Response to Crisis
                                                 OLS
                                                                                 Control group
                                         ITT Treatment
                                                             Observations            mean
                                        Effect Estimates
Outcome variable                                                                  (std. dev.)
                                                (1)              (2)                      (3)
Laid off staff or cut down on hiring           0.047             340                     0.257
                                             (0.051)                                    (0.438)
Lowered employee salaries                     -0.026             340                     0.092
                                             (0.032)                                    (0.289)
Cut production                              -0.080**             340                     0.206
                                             (0.040)                                    (0.406)
Diversified business activities               -0.015             340                     0.431
                                             (0.057)                                    (0.496)
Sought government assistance                   0.056             340                     0.128
                                             (0.044)                                    (0.335)
None                                          -0.006             340                     0.115
                                             (0.037)                                    (0.319)
Other                                          0.043             340                     0.216
                                             (0.050)                                    (0.412)
Number of changes made                         0.025             340                     1.330
                                             (0.092)                                    (0.810)


Note: Column 1 contains the treatment effect point estimates and robust standard errors for
separate OLS estimations. All outcome variables, except for "number of changes made", are binary
variables for the responses to the question "Which changes has your firm made in response to the
current economic situation?" (multiple answers were allowed). This question was asked at follow-
up in reference to the recent economic crisis. "Number of changes made" is a count of the number
of changes reported in response to the question above. These questions were not asked at
baseline, which is why we do not control for the baseline outcome variable in this table. All
regressions include controls for strata dummies and re-randomization variables, as well as a
dummy for having been surveyed in March 2009 (vs. April, May or June) at follow-up. Column 3
contains means and standard deviations for the control group at follow-up. Significance levels: *10
percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.




                                                  29
    Table 8: Self-Reported Reasons for Not Using Consulting Services in Control Group Firms
                                                                 % of enterprises mentioning
Reasons for not using consulting services
                                                                this reason (multiple mention)
Would be a good investment, but don't have funds                            46.3
Don't know what the benefits would be                                       22.2
Simply hadn't considered it                                                 18.5
Didn't need the services                                                    13.9
Other                                                                       11.1
Didn't know these services existed                                           7.4
Not worth the cost                                                           5.6
N                                                                           108

Note: This table includes all control group firms that, at the time of the follow-up survey,
reported never having used consulting services.




                                                 30
                           Appendix Table 1: Analysis of Attrition in Follow-Up Survey
                                                      OLS
                                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                                                Binary=1 if enterprise was not
                                                                                interviewed or not confirmed
                                                                                     closed at follow-up
                                                                                   (1)         (2)        (3)
Treatment                                                                        -0.020      -0.017      0.141
                                                                                (0.029)     (0.030)    (0.157)
Commerce sector dummy                                                                         0.021      0.047
                                                                                            (0.039)    (0.049)
Services sector dummy                                                                         0.041    0.072*
                                                                                            (0.033)    (0.042)
Full-time paid employees                                                                      0.001      0.001
                                                                                            (0.001)    (0.001)
Age of principal decision maker (years)                                                       0.001      0.001
                                                                                            (0.001)    (0.002)
Male principal decision maker dummy                                                          -0.043     -0.020
                                                                                            (0.036)    (0.045)
Business age (years)                                                                          0.000      0.000
                                                                                            (0.000)    (0.000)
Log (Avg. sales Jul, Aug and Sep 2007 in 1000s USD)                                           0.002      0.000
                                                                                            (0.008)    (0.011)
Profits (Sep 2007 sales minus costs, 1000s USD)                                              -0.000     -0.000
                                                                                            (0.000)    (0.000)
Return on assets (ROA)                                                                        0.002     -0.021
                                                                                            (0.025)    (0.038)
Commerce sector dummy*Treatment                                                                         -0.071
                                                                                                       (0.080)
Services sector dummy*Treatment                                                                         -0.094
                                                                                                       (0.073)
Full-time paid employees*Treatment                                                                       0.000
                                                                                                       (0.002)
Age of principal decision maker (years)*Treatment                                                       -0.001
                                                                                                       (0.003)
Male principal decision maker dummy*Treatment                                                           -0.078
                                                                                                       (0.074)
Business age (years)*Treatment                                                                          -0.000
                                                                                                       (0.003)
Log (Avg. sales)*Treatment                                                                               0.006
                                                                                                       (0.017)
Profits*Treatment                                                                                       -0.000


                                                   31
                                                                                                    (0.000)
Return on assets (ROA)*Treatment                                                                     0.057
                                                                                                    (0.045)
Constant                                                                       0.106***    0.056     0.003
                                                                                (0.018)   (0.076)   (0.102)
R-squared                                                                        0.001     0.039     0.053
N                                                                                 432       432       432
F-test p-value: joint significance of interaction terms                                              0.850
Mean of dependent variable                                                      0.100     0.101      0.101

Note: All explanatory variables are measured at baseline. Binary control variables included for when
covariate is missing, and then missing covariate coded as zero. Variables with *Treatment at the end are
interacted with a treatment group dummy. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *10
percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.




                       Appendix Table 2: Analysis of Matching with IMSS Data
                                                OLS
                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                    Binary=1 if enterprise was
                                                                     matched with IMSS data
                                                                    (1)            (2)      (3)
Treatment                                                          0.019          0.014   -0.011
                                                                  (0.050)       (0.049)  (0.258)
Commerce sector dummy                                                            -0.018    0.016
                                                                                (0.062)  (0.076)
Services sector dummy                                                             0.042    0.087
                                                                                (0.055)  (0.069)
Full-time paid employees                                                          0.000 0.002***
                                                                                (0.001)  (0.001)
Age of principal decision maker (years)                                          -0.001   -0.002
                                                                                (0.002)  (0.003)
Male principal decision maker dummy                                             0.102*     0.036
                                                                                (0.053)  (0.064)
Business age (years)                                                             -0.000   -0.001
                                                                                (0.001)  (0.001)
Log (Avg. sales Jul, Aug and Sep 2007 in 1000s USD)                            0.083*** 0.084***
                                                                                (0.014)  (0.017)
Profits (Sep 2007 sales minus costs, 1000s USD)                                   0.000  0.000*
                                                                                (0.000)  (0.000)
Return on assets (ROA)                                                           -0.004   -0.020

                                                    32
                                                                              (0.030)      (0.043)
Commerce sector dummy*Treatment                                                             -0.073
                                                                                           (0.133)
Services sector dummy*Treatment                                                             -0.075
                                                                                           (0.120)
Full-time paid employees*Treatment                                                        -0.006**
                                                                                           (0.002)
Age of principal decision maker (years)*Treatment                                            0.001
                                                                                           (0.005)
Male principal decision maker dummy*Treatment                                                0.146
                                                                                           (0.110)
Business age (years)*Treatment                                                               0.005
                                                                                           (0.004)
Log (Avg. sales)*Treatment                                                                   0.008
                                                                                           (0.035)
Profits*Treatment                                                                           -0.000
                                                                                           (0.000)
Return on assets (ROA)*Treatment                                                             0.010
                                                                                           (0.057)
Constant                                                           0.567*** 0.329***       0.332**
                                                                    (0.030)  (0.121)       (0.149)
R-squared                                                            0.000    0.113          0.144
N                                                                     432      427            427
F-test p-value: joint significance of interaction terms                                      0.122
Average of dependent variable                                       0.574         0.569      0.569

Note: All explanatory variables are measured at baseline. Binary control variables included for
when covariate is missing, and then missing covariate coded as zero. Variables with *Treatment
at the end are interacted with a treatment group dummy. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significance levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.




           Appendix Table 3: Number of Enterprises Surveyed Each Month (Follow-Up Survey)
       Survey month              # treatment         % treatment      # control       % control
       Mar-09                         95                70.37            152           62.55
       Apr-09                         29                21.48            68            27.98
       May-09                         10                 7.41            20             8.23
       Jun-09                          1                 0.74             3             1.23




                                                    33
                Appendix Table 4: ITT Treatment Effect Estimates, Short-Run Business Outcomes, Winsorized
                                                            OLS

                                                                                                              Non-winsorized
                                                      1%               1%           5%             5%          control group
                                                   winsorized       winsorized   winsorized     winsorized          mean
                                                                                                                 (std. dev.)
Outcome variable
                                                       (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)
Full-time paid employees                              1.310           0.552         0.025          -0.187          12.428
                                                     (1.339)         (1.156)       (0.835)        (0.811)         (22.281)
                                                       378             378           378            378             243
Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 (1000s
                                                     -7.380          -11.616        -3.758        -5.770           63.384
USD)
                                                    (10.235)         (8.353)       (6.454)       (5.956)         (163.643)
                                                        307             307           307           307               200
Log (Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 in          0.004           0.047         0.013         0.055             2.391
1000s USD)                                           (0.174)         (0.143)       (0.171)       (0.141)           (2.023)
                                                        307             307           307           307               200
Feb 2009 costs (1000s USD)                            -1.918          -2.242        -2.341        -2.410           43.157
                                                     (8.319)         (8.010)       (4.061)       (3.938)         (113.758)
                                                        304             304           304           304               204
Profits (Feb 2009 sales minus costs, 1000s USD)        5.743           5.718         3.924         4.027           11.460
                                                     (5.061)         (5.008)       (2.620)       (2.576)          (97.044)
                                                        265             265           265           265               176
Log (business assets)                                 -0.049          -0.100        -0.064        -0.115             4.307
                                                     (0.175)         (0.157)       (0.172)       (0.154)           (1.699)
                                                        319             319           319           319               203
Productivity residual                                0.262*          0.243*        0.244**       0.230**            -0.095
  Residual from regression of log Feb 2009           (0.137)         (0.127)       (0.118)       (0.111)           (1.272)
sales on log employees and log business assets          250             250           250           250               174
Return on assets (ROA)                               0.084*            0.079       0.067**       0.064*              0.012
  Feb 2009 sales minus costs divided by assets       (0.050)         (0.054)       (0.034)       (0.036)           (0.471)
                                                        236             236           236           236               154
Controls for baseline value of outcome                  No              Yes           No            Yes                -

Note: Each cell in Columns 1 through 4 contains the treatment effect point estimate, robust standard error, and number of
observations, for a separate OLS estimation. For the regressions that control for the outcome variable measured at baseline
(Columns 2 and 4), when the baseline outcome variable is missing, the missing value is filled-in with zero and a dummy
variable indicating that the baseline observation is missing is added to the model. All regressions include controls for strata
dummies and re-randomization variables, as well as a dummy for having been surveyed in March 2009 (vs. April, May or June)
at follow-up. Full-time paid employees, sales, costs, and assets, are only winsorized at the top x% since they are bounded
below by zero. All other variables are winsorized at the top and bottom x%. Column 5 contains non-winsorized means and
standard deviations for the control group at follow-up. Significance levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.


                                                               34
     Appendix Table 5: ITT Treatment Effect Estimates, Short-Run Business Outcomes, Restricted Sample
                                                    OLS
                                                                                            Control group
                                                                        ITT treatment
                                                                                                mean
                                                                       effect estimates
Outcome variable                                                                             (std. dev.)
                                                                          (1)        (2)           (3)
Full-time paid employees                                                -1.771     -1.341       13.182
                                                                       (1.389)    (1.103)      (19.925)
                                                                          221        221           143
Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 (1000s USD)                      -14.720    -11.426       69.450
                                                                      (14.976)   (12.218)     (181.105)
                                                                          221        221           143
Log (Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 in 1000s USD)                -0.016     -0.019         2.520
                                                                       (0.211)    (0.176)       (1.985)
                                                                          221        221           143
Feb 2009 costs (1000s USD)                                             -12.367    -13.203       46.598
                                                                      (11.412)   (10.956)     (111.674)
                                                                          221        221           143
Profits (Feb 2009 sales minus costs, 1000s USD)                          3.793      3.788       13.161
                                                                       (6.628)    (6.332)     (102.459)
                                                                          221        221           143
Log (business assets)                                                   -0.078     -0.118         4.432
                                                                       (0.192)    (0.169)       (1.738)
                                                                          221        221           143
Productivity residual                                                   0.261*     0.249*        -0.073
 Residual from regression of log Feb 2009 sales                        (0.158)    (0.146)       (1.302)
 on log employees and log business assets                                 221        221           143
Return on assets (ROA)                                                  0.118*      0.112         0.018
 Feb 2009 sales minus costs divided by assets                          (0.065)    (0.068)       (0.487)
                                                                          221        221           143
Controls for baseline value of outcome                                    No         Yes            -

Note: This tables included only enterprises that report all outcome variables. Each cell in Columns 1 and 2
contains the treatment effect point estimate, robust standard error, and number of observations, for a
separate OLS estimation. For the regressions that control for the outcome variable measured at baseline
(Column 2), when the baseline outcome variable is missing, the missing value is filled-in with zero and a
dummy variable indicating that the baseline observation is missing is added to the model. All regressions
include controls for strata dummies and re-randomization variables, as well as a dummy for having been
surveyed in March 2009 (vs. April, May or June) at follow-up. Column 3 contains means and standard
deviations for the control group at follow-up. Significance levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.



                                                  35
   Appendix Table 6: ITT Treatment Effect Estimates, Short-Run Business Outcomes, Difference-in-
                                             Difference
                                                 OLS
                                                                                     Control group
                                                                 ITT treatment
                                                                                         mean
                                                                effect estimates
Outcome variable                                                                      (std. dev.)
                                                                        (1)                 (2)
Full-time paid employees                                              0.578              12.428
                                                                     (2.351)            (22.281)
                                                                       810                 243
Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 (1000s USD)                    -14.464             63.384
                                                                    (23.358)           (163.643)
                                                                       675                 200
Log (Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 in 1000s USD)              0.017               2.391
                                                                     (0.237)             (2.023)
                                                                       675                 200
Feb 2009 costs (1000s USD)                                            27.333             43.157
                                                                    (25.419)           (113.758)
                                                                       681                 204
Profits (Feb 2009 sales minus costs, 1000s USD)                      -15.357             11.460
                                                                    (20.485)            (97.044)
                                                                       602                 176
Log (business assets)                                                 -0.098              4.307
                                                                     (0.227)             (1.699)
                                                                       627                 203
Productivity residual                                                 0.306               -0.095
 Residual from regression of log Feb 2009 sales                      (0.217)             (1.272)
 on log employees and log business assets                              515                 174
Return on assets (ROA)                                              0.272**               0.012
 Feb 2009 sales minus costs divided by assets                        (0.133)             (0.471)
                                                                       488                 154

Note: Each cell in Column 1 contains the treatment effect point estimate, robust standard error, and
number of observations, for a separate OLS difference-in-difference estimation. Each regressions uses
the full sample of enterprises at baseline and follow-up and includes a dummy for being in the
treatment group, a dummy for the follow-up period, an interaction term between the treatment and
follow-up dummies, as well as controls for strata dummies, re-randomization variables, and a dummy
for having been surveyed in March 2009 (vs. April, May or June) at follow-up. The point estimates
displayed in Column 1 are coefficients on the interaction term between treatment and follow-up.
Column 2 contains means and standard deviations for the control group at follow-up. Significance
levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.


                                                  36
                    Appendix Table 7: Follow-Up Summary Statistics - Short-Run Business Outcomes
                                            Mean and Standard Deviations
                                                                          (1)-(2)                            (4)-(2)
                                                                        Difference      Treatment &       Difference
                                         Treatment         Control      (p-value)         Took-up          (p-value)
                                             (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)               (5)
Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009      53.889          63.384         -9.495           61.075            -2.309
(1000s USD)                              (160.545)       (163.643)       (0.626)         (103.216)          (0.919)
Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009      45.905          56.203        -10.298           61.075             4.872
(1000s USD), 1% winsorized                (99.329)       (116.830)       (0.439)         (103.216)          (0.775)
Feb 2009 costs (1000s USD)                 42.353          43.157         -0.804           42.882            -0.275
                                         (167.711)       (113.758)       (0.961)          (85.825)          (0.987)
Feb 2009 costs (1000s USD) , 1%            31.887          38.951         -7.064           42.882             3.931
winsorized                                (81.698)        (83.323)       (0.485)          (85.825)          (0.765)
Profits (Feb 2009 sales minus costs,       10.964          11.460         -0.496           15.804             4.344
1000s USD)                                (45.858)        (97.044)       (0.964)          (57.117)          (0.767)
Profits (Feb 2009 sales minus costs,       10.964           6.918         4.046            15.804             8.886
1000s USD), 1% winsorized                 (45.858)        (47.129)       (0.506)          (57.117)          (0.271)
Business assets (1000s USD)               258.923         331.416        -72.493          313.187           -18.229
                                         (508.865)      (1236.195)       (0.547)         (560.688)          (0.912)
Business assets (1000s USD), 1%           258.923         242.534         16.389          313.187            70.653
winsorized                               (508.865)       (446.492)       (0.765)         (560.688)          (0.312)
Productivity residual                       0.163           -0.095        0.257*            0.429         0.524***
                                           (0.967)         (1.272)       (0.095)           (0.854)          (0.008)
Productivity residual, 1% winsorized        0.157           -0.090        0.247*            0.419         0.509***
                                           (0.951)         (1.226)       (0.097)           (0.820)          (0.008)
Return on assets (ROA)                      0.091           0.012         0.080             0.174           0.162**
                                           (0.402)         (0.471)       (0.195)           (0.429)          (0.043)
Return on assets (ROA), 1%                  0.088           0.030         0.058             0.174           0.144**
winsorized                                 (0.388)         (0.292)       (0.198)           (0.429)          (0.011)
Note: Columns 1, 2, and 4 present means and standard deviations (in parentheses). Column 3 shows the difference in
means across the treatment and control group with the corresponding p-value in parentheses. Column 5 shows the
non-experimental difference between those who took-up in treatment minus those in control, and the corresponding p-
value in parentheses. For the 1% winsorized variables, sales, costs, and assets are only winsorized at the top 1% since
they are bounded below by zero. All other variables are winsorized at the top and bottom 1%. Significance levels: *10
percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.




                                                          37
                     Appendix Table 8: Non-Response on Follow-up Survey
                                                                                         (1)-(2)
                                                                                      Difference
                                                             Treatment     Control     (p-value)
                                                                 (1)         (2)           (3)
% That Did not provide alternative contact person              16.296      18.519        -2.222
                                                                                        (0.589)
% That Did not report Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 sales         20.741      17.695         3.045
                                                                                        (0.469)
N                                                               135          243           378

Note: Columns 1 and 2 show the percentage of enterprises in the treatment and control group,
respectively, that did not provide an alternative contact person or sales on the follow-up survey,
conditional on participating in the survey. Column 3 shows the difference in percentages
between the treatment and control group with the corresponding p-value in parentheses.
Significance levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, ***1 percent.




                                                    38
       Appendix Table 9: ITT Treatment Effect Estimates, Short-Run Business Outcomes, IMSS Sample
                                                   OLS
                                                                                             Control group
                                                                          ITT treatment
                                                                                                 mean
                                                                         effect estimates
Outcome variable                                                                              (std. dev.)
                                                                            (1)     (2)             (3)
Full-time paid employees                                                   0.764   0.380         15.932
                                                                         (1.841) (1.405)        (25.703)
                                                                            229     229             148
Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 (1000s USD)                        -17.701 -16.381         77.325
                                                                        (23.164) (14.531)      (161.353)
                                                                            187     187             125
Log (Avg. sales Dec 2008, Jan and Feb 2009 in 1000s USD)                  -0.182  -0.104           3.045
                                                                         (0.204) (0.168)         (1.713)
                                                                            187     187             125
Feb 2009 costs (1000s USD)                                                -1.529  -3.804         63.156
                                                                        (23.042) (19.729)      (141.134)
                                                                            176     176             120
Profits (Feb 2009 sales minus costs, 1000s USD)                            5.566   5.904           2.321
                                                                         (8.197) (8.102)        (43.806)
                                                                            160     160             109
Log (business assets)                                                     -0.012  -0.008           4.655
                                                                         (0.208) (0.202)         (1.624)
                                                                            187     187             121
Productivity residual                                                      0.080   0.088           0.116
 Residual from regression of log Feb 2009 sales                          (0.181) (0.170)         (1.154)
 on log employees and log business assets                                   152     152             99
Return on assets (ROA)                                                   0.173*   0.197*          -0.001
 Feb 2009 sales minus costs divided by assets                            (0.098) (0.113)         (0.574)
                                                                            140     140             95
Controls for baseline value of outcome                                      No      Yes              -

Note: This tables included only enterprises that were successfully matched with IMSS data. Each cell in
Columns 1 and 2 contains the treatment effect point estimate, robust standard error, and number of
observations, for a separate OLS estimation. For the regressions that control for the outcome variable
measured at baseline (Column 2), when the baseline outcome variable is missing, the missing value is filled-
in with zero and a dummy variable indicating that the baseline observation is missing is added to the model.
All regressions include controls for strata dummies and re-randomization variables, as well as a dummy for
having been surveyed in March 2009 (vs. April, May or June) at follow-up. Column 3 contains means and
standard deviations for the control group at follow-up. Significance levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, ***1
percent.



                                                  39
                                 Appendix 1: Surveys and Data Definitions

Survey Questions for Entrepreneurial Spirit Index

                                                       Strongly                                Strongly
                                                                  Disagree   Neutral   Agree
                                                       disagree                                 agree
 a.   I have professional goals.                           1         2         3        4         5
 b.   I revise my goals periodically.                      1         2         3        4         5
      If I don’t reach a goal in the way I wanted
 c.                                                        1         2         3        4         5
      to I try again.
 d.   I can’t motivate my business partners.*              1         2         3        4         5
 e.   Everything I need for success lies in myself.        1         2         3        4         5
     I prefer to do routine tasks instead of
 f.                                                        1         2         3        4         5
     doing something new in my work.*
     I think the government should give me
 g.                                                        1         2         3        4         5
     opportunities.*
     I have to reach some goals every day to
 h.                                                        1         2         3        4         5
     feel satisfied.
*Reverse coded


Survey Questions for Human Resources Management Index

                                                       Strongly                                Strongly
                                                                  Disagree   Neutral   Agree
                                                       disagree                                agree
    The employees identify with the objectives
 a.                                                        1          2         3        4         5
    of the company.
    The firm lets its employees know if they
 b.                                                        1          2         3        4         5
    have done something wrong.
      All responsibilities are clearly assigned for
 c.                                                        1          2         3        4         5
      each of the members of the firm.
 d. All decisions are made by the same person.             1          2         3        4         5
    The firm gives positive recognition to its
 e.                                                        1          2         3        4         5
    employees.
    There is low turnover of employees in the
 f.                                                        1          2         3        4         5
    firm.




                                                      40
Definitions of Financial Variables

 Variable           Definition
                    Average of non-missing observation for December 2008, January 2009, and
 Sales
                    February 2009 sales (from survey question 29)
 Costs              February 2009 costs (from survey question 22)
 Profits            February 2009 sales minus February 2009 costs (from survey questions 22 and 29c)
                    Residual from a regression of log(February 2009 sales) on log(total employees) and
 Productivity       log(assets), where “February 2009 sales ? comes from survey question 29c, “total
 residual           employees ? comes from question 17, and “assets ? is the sum of questions 21.a.2
                    through 21.f.2
 ROA – return       February 2009 sales minus February 2009 costs (from survey questions 22 and 29c)
 on assets          divided assets (sum of questions 21.a.2 through 21.f.2)
Note: Definitions are the same for the baseline survey, with the reference months being July 2007,
August 2007, and September 2007 instead of December 2008, January 2009, and February 2009.


 Survey Questions Used to Calculate Financial Variables

 Employees
 17. ¿Cuántos empleados tiene la empresa en total (incluyéndolo a usted y personal en todos los
 establecimientos)? Incluye todos los tipos de empleados. Escriba el número en el espacio dado.
 How many employees does the business have (including yourself and staff in all establishments)? Include all
 types of employees. Write the number in the space below.
     ____ ____ ____ empleados employees

 Sales
 29. ¿Cuáles fueron las ventas/ingresos totales aproximadas de su negocio en diciembre 2008, enero
 2009, y febrero 2009, por mes? Escriba los números en el espacio dado.
 Approximately how much were your firm’s total monthly sales/income in December, January and February?
 Write the numbers in the space below.
   a) Diciembre 2008                                     997 No sabe         998 No quiere contestar
   December                                   pesos Don´t know             Refuse to answer
   b) Enero 2009                                         997 No sabe         998 No quiere contestar
   January                                    pesos Don´t know             Refuse to answer
   c) Febrero 2009                                    997 No sabe            998 No quiere contestar
   February                                   pesos Don´t know             Refuse to answer


 Costs
 22. ¿Cuánto fueron los costos/gastos aproximados totales del negocio en febrero 2009? Escriba el
 número. What were the total approximate costs of your business in February 2009? Write the number.

 __________________pesos        997 No sabe Don’t know        998 No quiere contester Refuse to answer

                                                       41
Assets
21. Lea la pregunta (a) para cada fila. Verifique que se trata solamente de bienes del negocio y no del
hogar. Si el empresario no tiene estos activos, puede pasar a la siguiente fila sin preguntar (b). Read
question (a) for every row. Verify that we are talking about assets of the business only and not the home. If the
business person does not have these assets, you can go on to the next row without asking (b).




                                         1. ¿En este momento,
                                         tiene esta empresa…?            2. Si tuviera que reponer todo su…,
                                        At the moment, does the        ¿cuánto le costaría, aproximadamente,
                                            business have…?             comprarlo en condiciones similares?
                                      1 = Sí  Pase a (2)               If you had to replace all of your …, how
                                      1= Yes Go to (2)                 much would it cost to buy it in a similar
                                      2 = No  Pase a (b)-(f)                          condition?
                                      2= No  Go to (b)-(f)
                                                                                      997 No sabe Don’t know
     Maquinaria                                      997 No sabe
a.                                                                                    998 No quiere contestar
     Machinery                                       Don’t know
                                                                                    Refuse to answer
     Herramientas o utensilios                                                        997 No sabe Don’t know
                                                     997 No sabe
b.   de trabajo                                                                       998 No quiere contestar
                                                     Don’t know
     Tools                                                                          Refuse to answer
     Mobiliario y equipo
                                                                                      997 No sabe Don’t know
     (ejemplo: computadoras)                         997 No sabe
c.                                                                                    998 No quiere contestar
     Furniture and equipment                         Don’t know
                                                                                    Refuse to answer
     (example: computers)
                                                                                      997 No sabe Don’t know
     Vehículos del negocio                           997 No sabe
d.                                                                                    998 No quiere contestar
     Business vehicles                               Don’t know
                                                                                    Refuse to answer
     Local propio (edificio y                                                         997 No sabe Don’t know
                                                     997 No sabe
e.   terreno)                                                                         998 No quiere contestar
                                                     Don’t know
     Property (buildings and land)                                                  Refuse to answer
     Otros activos no
                                                                                      997 No sabe Don’t know
     inventarios (especifique):                      997 No sabe
f.                                                                                    998 No quiere contestar
     Other non-inventory goods                       Don’t know
                                                                                    Refuse to answer
     (specify):




                                                        42
